---
title: RxNDA.com
description: breaking the NDA logjam
layout: post
tags:
- RxNDA
- Contracts
- Software
---

I'm very pleased to announce [RxNDA][URL], a simple online service for e-signing commercial NDAs.  RxNDA is the culmination of my profound annoyance with pre-deal NDAs in private practice, with a dash of the contract automation work I've done on [Common Form].  I plan to use it with my clients.  You might consider using it with yours.  It ought to save a lot of money, and a lot of sanity, all the way 'round.

[URL]: https://rxnda.com

[Common Form]: https://commonform.github.io

In a nutshell, [RxNDA][URL] allows you to pick from a menu of form confidentiality agreements, fill in the blanks, e-sign, and send to another party via e-mail, with nothing but a valid credit card and e-mail address.  The other side can use the same service to countersign online, with a seven-day deadline.  If the other side countersigns, RxNDA charges your credit card $10, everyone gets a fully signed Word copy by e-mail, and the site deletes its record of the offer.  If for whatever reason your offer isn't accepted through the site, you aren't charged at all.

On the legal side, RxNDA showcases my approach to open form contracts.  [The master template and software to build all the forms][forms]---every permutation of broad or narrow, one- or two-way, and entity and individual signatories---can be had online, under a permissive public license drafted specifically for legal forms.  If you want Word files or PDFs, you're welcome to them.  If you're so inclined, please share your feedback!  I plan to keep the forms "open", so folks can use them freely without the website if they like, and to reinvest in the forms as I go, with the help of others' sharp eyes.

[forms]: https://github.com/rxnda/rxnda-forms

Unlike my previous work on NDAs, from a totally blank slate, the RxNDA forms aim to surprise company counsel as little as possible.  I reviewed stacks of NDAs from my practice files and corporate document lists, spruced up my NDA review checklist, turned each checkbox into a section heading, and drafted from there.  The resulting forms aim to be plain, but resolutely orthodox.  As easy to review and approve as possible.

Perhaps the most important aspect of my approach is rigorous versioning.  Each form NDA comes not only with its own identifying code, for easy recognition, but also an [edition number that communicates how it is changed][edition].  Every change, no matter how minute, will come under the banner of a new edition. Old editions will remain available, though not advertised for use, so counsel who see and approve one edition of a form can confidently compare to the latest and approve upgrades for their clients.

[edition]: https://reviewersedition.org

On the client side, this rigorous revision control system ensures sending and receiving a form by the same name and edition through [rxnda.com][URL] means ending up with the exact same legal terms, every time.  As the forms evolve, I plan to offer special facilities---e-mail updates, RSS, and so on---announcing new editions and forms, distributing redlines, and otherwise helping counsel stay up-to-date, retain confidence in the latest iterations, and letting me know when a form doesn't quite fit as simple as possible.

I'm also very interested in setting up a facility for attorneys to recommend specific forms for specific uses, with custom commentary and guidance, through the site.  Much the same way that a physician prescribes a medication, I want to make it possible to direct clients on uses of particular forms in particular contexts, with RxNDA serving as diligent pharmacy, doling out the prescribed terms and instructions.

In all, I hope that RxNDA will help as least some NDA users skip time eyeballing pointless variations of the same old NDA, relying instead on a familiar, public form set that we can evolve in the open, toward more clarity and predictability.  In my line of work, I see literally scores of form pre-deal NDAs, varying only so much as to require a review from nil.  The most diligent among us incorporate tidbits gleaned from others' forms into our own.   But even when we make those little evolutions in a timely manner---not always---there is another potentially broken step to ending up in each client's workflow.  A lot of dead wood gets signed, and the more successful and long-lived a client becomes, the more they carry with them.  That makes it very hard to improve the state of the art, even as we all see that the fine art of crafting NDAs gets short shrift, the curse of their ubiquity and the grin-and-bear-it attitude that attends their use.

We all know working with NDAs stinks, even as we've gotten used to the smell.  I want to break through, and get better NDAs in the hands of business and individuals for a lot less than what I'd have to charge for even a smidgen of my time.

I love the craft of contract drafting.  And I want a lot more people who deserve its benefits to be able to afford them.  This is a very small chip off that huge challenge.  But it's one that I hope will start many new conversations that get us past wide-eyed generalities about technology and the profession, to clients who end up in court a little less often, and a little bit happier for it.
