---
title: Burn Your Bugout Bag
---

The historians aren't nearly as sure as the rest of us that Hernán Cortés burned his ships on landing on the Yucatán.  He may have simply beached them, or lost a few to shipworm.  In any event, he seems to have returned his last good vessel to Spain after landing.  The result was the same.  No ships.  No going back.  Make do or die.

Five hundred years later, good friends of mine, citizens of a thoroughly settled, well established, prosperous American industrial democracy, are prepping "bugout bags".  My contrarian take:  Burn your bugout bag.

Bugout bags are typically duffels or backpacks, these contain a minimum of life-sustaining supplies, like medications, food, camping kit, first aid, and toiletries.  So far, so Boy Scout.  But add to that, invariably, a mishmash of Manly Accessories the owner is unlikely to have any use for, or justification to own, in everyday life.  Handguns, large knives, axes or entrenching tools, and generous side helpings of [paracord](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parachute_cord) are de rigeur.  Some store their bags in gun safes, next to the rifles they intend to grab with the bag.

I get it.  I own a camping knife.  I own a felling ax.  I am a desk bound lawyer.  But these are very fun things to own, and I was in a consumptive mood.  I have used them maybe ten times total.  Still fun.  No regrets.

Most people who know me personally learn pretty quick that I also exhibit a deep emotional need to keep pens and pencils on-hand to feel prepared for daily life.  Some social trauma in my childhood, I think.  I've come close to panic attack looking for pens I thought I'd lost.  By the end of law school, I'd amassed a small crate of disposable pens, less than half of which I remembered buying, which duly moved with me to California.  I could count on one hand the number of pens and pencils I've lost in my whole life.  For a while, I tried buying refillable pens, to stem the acquisitive tide.  But I only ended up with a box of those, too.

I've also carried pocket knives regularly for nearly all of my adulthood.  I can't say in good conscience that I have always seen them, coolly and dispassionately, as handy tools.  I started carrying daily in Moscow, where I bought a cheap Chinese automatic.  Since then, there has always been an element of talismanic power in them.  A deeply irrational part of my psyche trenchantly maintains that three inches of superlative box cutting, apple peeling, pencil pointing sharp stuff will slice me out of my grimmest waking nightmares.  That it will solve all the problems my inner [Walter Mitty](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Secret_Life_of_Walter_Mitty) can dream up.

Objectively, chaos is far more likely to summon situations that are not amenable to pocket knife solution, or any solution at all, and certainly not the specific ones I've dreamt up ahead of time and obsessed over.  Bringing a knife into a maelstrom would sooner make it worse, for myself and others, even were I well trained in the decisive use of pointy things.  I'm not.  And the same would be only more true of a handgun.  The fantasy is decisiveness.  The odds are escalation and simple accident.  The only one who's been poked, sliced, or stabbed by any of my pocket knives is me.  God knows how many people I've made nervous, dropping them in public, or wearing them at eye level on the bus or a train.

Realizing that led me to set pocket knives aside for a year.  A few I put in storage.  A few, especially the scary looking ones, I gave away.  When I was going to be anxious, I wanted to face that fear, to work through it, without a magic pocket object to equalize all the made-up odds and eat up all the remainders of my dubious risk calculations.  Past the initial, panicked unease, it became plenty clear, fast, that my best tools and countermeasures were not and could not be weapons.  My best tools and countermeasures were preventive, not reactive, and definitely not preemptive.  Overwhelmingly, they were social.

Where I travel often, I ought to be known, connected, and respected for all the right reasons.  I should be fully paid up on the common investments we share in common security.  I do not mean police with martial training touting all the weapons I don't have, ready to use them on my behalf, whenever I phone in a strike.  I mean the social and practical arrangements that make militarized policing, and atrophy of responsibility in reliance on militarized policing, unnecessary.

Where I travel less often, I ought to be aware.  Not projecting danger where it _could_ be---anywhere---but receptive to it when it appears, which is rare.  When I'm not looking for trouble, I should route myself where it's as scarce as possible.  I should carry myself in a way, and ideally in company, that projects strength and security without increasing others' ambient level of fear.  I should deescalate, actively and passively.

There are flukes.  There are crazy people.  There are not-crazy people who become crazy, quick.  I've read the news, kept the company of first responders, and, yes, dealt with some situations myself, albeit primarily abroad.  I've also read the statistics.  By objective measure, never has reality been so hospitable, and never has it looked so much the opposite.  It's trite to say that our media environment selectively amplifies the scary and salacious.  It's less trite than it should be to say their coverage creates more of the incidents it seeks to cover, like mass shootings.  In the end, I've drawn the conclusion that our most effective countermeasures for these risks are counterintuitive and systemic, not visceral and case-by-case.

The answer is _not_ feeding the collective action problem by investing in dubious private defenses, especially when doing so saps motivation to contribute as a member of society and a citizen to a higher standard for all.  This is not just a simple holdout problem.  When the well-to-do privatize security, and public security suffers as a result, the well-to-do end up trapped in enclaves, living in gated communities or compounds, literally or metaphorically.  The poor become more anxious, unable to buy what others consider essential.  They also suffer most for lack of strong public security, accessible to all.  In other words, the wealthy and scared stop investing in ways that benefit the common weal.  Both sides of the divide tumble down their respective spirals, escalating the latent potential for problems.