---
title: Exactly the Wrong AI Copyrightability Case
description: the Creativity Machine assumed away the debate
tags:
- Artificial Intelligence
- Art
- Copyright
---

Friday's trial-court decision in Thaler versus Perlmutter, for case 22-1564 in the DC district court, epitomizes the sad fact that just the wrong situation can make bad headlines easy at the just the wrong time, early on in a legal debate.

I'm sure there will be links like "court rules AI art can't be copyrighted" aplenty.  *They will be wrong.*  The court didn't rule that AI art can't be copyrighted.  It ruled that copyright requires human authorship.  That will surprise approximately zero copyright lawyers...or people who have read [the Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyright).

Stephen Thaler tried to register copyright in an image purportedly output by his "Creativity Machine", which he claims works entirely on its own.  The Copyright Office predictably rejected his application, saying only creative works authored by people can be registered.  Thaler sued, and the court agreed with the Copyright Office.  No human creativity, no copyright.

The reason the click mongers can write headlines about "AI" is that Thaler _insisted_, and therefore the court accepted, that his particular AI machine didn't involved any of his own creativity.  That wasn't argued.  It was assumed.  The assumption limits the legal question involved not to whether AI art in general can be copyrighted, but whether human creativity's required for copyright.

That puts Thaler in with failed plaintiffs of the past who insisted that gods, spirits, or unattributed voices communicated works they transcribed, and therefore got no copyrights.  It puts him in with the "monkey selfie" case.  It puts him _away_ from the big, old Supreme Court decision about copyrights for photographs, even though the camera "did all the work" that artists would have had to do before.  The decision against Thaler cites all these cases.

The court says:

> Copyright has never stretched so far...as to protect works generated by new forms of technology operating absent any guiding human hand, as plaintiff urges here.

I might argue what Thaler,the plaintiff, didn't: that his guiding human hands were awfully involved in creating the machine, invoking it, and choosing what output to copyright.  For other works, like [Zarya of the Dawn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zarya_of_the_Dawn), we've seen arguments to prompt engineering, iterative modification, selection-curation, and so on.  We've seen analogies to other technologies and production processes.  But those weren't part of Thaler's case, because Thaler _insisted_ they shouldn't be.

This isn't a case about copyright in AI art.  It's a case about copyright when you equate an AI system, by an article of faith, to a god or a monkey.  If it's autonomous and one of us what now involved, you can't apply for copyrights on its work.  Those are big ifs.
