As I've been ticking off my Linus reading list, I've also been catching up on writing from [Raymond Nimmer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond_Nimmer), an intellectual property law professor and early law blogger who died in 2018.  I haven't always agreed with his positions, but I've come to better respect his point of view.  Fundamentally, Raymond came at legal policy questions as a steward.  He wanted a system that could "work" not just for one diametrically opposed interest group or another, but for all their business models, plus any number in between.

[Blogging on copy protection back in 2009](https://web.archive.org/web/20090901061357/http://www.ipinfoblog.com:80/archives/intellectual-property-content-protection-and-copyright.html), he wrote:

> While valuable works are produced by individuals not seeking to commercialize their work, other important information projects only occur where substantial financial support or commercial benefits exist or can be realistically sought.  <mark>Intellectual property law must support both and the range of options in between, but it is too often easy to ignore one of these models in policy discussions.</mark>

All software should be free software.  All software costs to make, and makers should be paid their works' full worth.

> Some of the economic stress of the content industries is attributable to the <mark>inevitable adjustments caused by new technology and social expectations</mark>.  Thus, a business model that assumes that a content producer or publisher can charge high prices for copies faces the likelihood of greater seepage (piracy) in a digital world than in a plastic world.  But while many in the public are comfortable copying commercial content created by others, most do not do so without authorization.  <mark>One role of law and its enforcement, of course, is to shape and influence expectations about complying with the norms set out in law.</mark>

As someone who studied policy debates of the past, participated in debates of the present, and anticipated debates still to come, Nimmer embraced the importance not just of law's internal working, buts its broader social function, in context.  His mental model of people wasn't just as property owners or pirates, but as independent actors trying to make a go, outside the gears of the law most of the time.  But not entirely free of its influence.

People try new business models all the time.  They rediscover why some old ones got discarded.  In the large, this is a form of testing constraints.  Those constraints, which may be technical or legal, shift over time and must be probed.  Highly general laws like copyright didn't so much fix a state of play in statute, then try to control it, as coexist and coevolve as one of my factors.  As a repository of old compromises, the law's natural role is often that  of middle ground in times of rapid change elsewhere:

> We are where we are today in terms of intellectual property policy and its impact on the content industries in part because of an on-going conflict between groups that, respectively, seek enhancement or protection of property rights, and those who would prefer a diminishing role for intellectual property (especially for copyright) in digital environments.  One theme frequently cited by the latter group argues that <mark>"information wants to be free" and that to the extent that commercial incentives or profit online are desired, they should be sought in ancillary ways, such as through advertising revenue</mark>, while the information itself is made freely available. ...

In Raymond's terms, today's coders are also content creators.  Good stewardship of copyright means supporting a gamut of economic models for them, too.  Be they financially liberated hobbyists, workaday clock punchers, independent entrepreneurs, or anything in between.
