---
title: Not Not Political
---

It feels like politics are taking over everything these days.  The ideological raiding parties and weaponized vocabularies of the Culture War march across every border.  Into conversations about law, about software, about open source.  About ink pens, about laptop stickers, about shipping supplies.  It can feel like an invasion, with no safe place left to hide.  A massively underachieving, overconfident, blustering imperium of narcissistic dolts with social media accounts systematically colonizing every nook and cranny of our daily lives.

Like many, I find this distressing.  For the most part, I live a quiet life, and decidedly by choice.  I get my conflict fix at work, representing clients.  And compared to the average half-hour contract negotiation any day of the week, the shouting rhetoric, bad arguments, and amateur debate tactics of the political stage depress me.  I would gladly change to some other channel, if only I could find the button, and if only I could believe something different awaits me.

At the same time, I've noticed a certain faulty, self-serving pattern in this point of view.  And I've seen it in others.

It is one thing for an industry or a hobby or a "community" broadly speaking to avoid talking politics, or talking in political terms.  It's nice to work with people whose political opinions I don't know, whose ideological proclivities I don't have to guess, whose work and other contributions I can consider and appreciate just so, as they're relevant to _our_ conversation, and not to some never-ending national brouhaha.  Frankly, it's even nice to _disagree_ in something other than the usual "left"-"right" political terms.

There are indeed areas where political vocabulary and political ideology try to force their way in, uninvited and utterly unjustified.  But as I've learned, not all attempts to "politicize" what we prefer to think of as nonpolitical, apolitical, politically immune, or even politically irrelevant can be written off so blithely.  Sometimes the matter itself is political, and the arrival of political people to talk about it in political ways simply reflects reality.  The shift is dismaying, but not disappointing, because at some honest level, it was all to be expected.

In simple terms:  Whether we _think_ of our work as political is one thing.  Whether we _talk_ about our work in politicized terms is another.  Whether the _effects_ of our work have social, political, and ideological consequences is quite another still.

When the politically relevant effects of our work become _predictable_, _discoverable_, or especially _obvious_, responsibility kicks in.  And things turn around.  This is the point where the work we do or even the diversions we enjoy can become urgently and obviously political, whether we like to think or talk about them that way or not.  When landing parties of political people wielding words of the moment and slapping "progressive" and "conservative" on two sides of every debate suddenly hit our shores, it isn't an unprovoked political invasion.  It's a natural, predictable, and often necessary consequence of mattering in the world.

Trouble is, the things that feel important, the things that seem to matter, the things can credibly change the world, sometimes actually are important, do matter, and meaningfully affect the experience of others.  From any selfish, individual point of the view, the best possible gig is one in which we're important, respected, powerful, and nonetheless completely immune from conflicts of interest, ideology, and the weather-like vagaries of broader opinion.  We want to be philosopher kings, or exalted technocrats, within the largest quasi-feudal domains of specialization we can get.  We want leeway and avoid accountability.  We invent broader impact when calculating our own importance, and ignore broader issues when calculating our own performance.

I see this in software, and I see it in other aspects of my life, like motorcycling.  I love working on motorcycles.  Especially the old ones, which are better to understand, better to maintain, and better to improve.  Suspiciously, the "good years" also predate EPA emissions regulations.  Those regulations killed off powerful designs, like two-stroke street engines, required new, complicated equipment, like evaporation canisters lean-fuel circuits, and hastened the shift toward more efficient and reliable electronics, essentially automotive computers, which also happen to be opaque, fragile, and impossible to fix with wrenches.

I don't want to hear that my 1978 Honda motorcycle with four carburetors and no radiator contributes to climate issues.  I don't want to think about the day when it's no longer practical, or legal, to ride it on public roads.  I don't want to hear that the garage hobby keeping my hands moving and my head screwed on straight collides with an epochal issues of international policymaking.  And I can see exactly the kind of bounty political parties stand to earn by politicizing the issue, and rounding up single-issue voters.  But there's no good case for giving vintage motorcycle buffs immunity from the political process.