---
title: Open to Money
description: how to get more good software without financializing the Hell out of everything
tags:
- Open Source
- Software Industry
---

The open source view of software production is right where the rents-and-restrictions business mantra was when Netscape [announced](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mozilla#History) [Mozilla](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UDFVBleAC-E)---standing in the way of the greatest pent-up wave of programmer energy yet beheld by man.  To release that potential, the way we think softare ought to be done has to integrate _both_ the free flow of bits _and_ the free flow of dollars.  That's what it will take to bring millions of new programmers into productive service.

Nobody lays out the welcome mat for millions of new competitors, especially young, predominantly foreign ones.  No welcome mat will be required.  The way programmers understand software production _will_ bend to the reality of global Internet penetration.  The question is whether the prior generation's thinking, largely [Whorfed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_relativity) by the "open source" memeset, will be flexible enough to pass on wisdom, or harden into a wall new coders will have to push off against.  Is what's coming next a rejection or open source or an evolution of it?

Timing-wise, I stand between.  I was coding in the late '90s and early 2000s, but working life began in earnest only after [the crash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2008_financial_crisis).  I looked up to, studied, and inherited from the dot-com generation.  But I didn't live their experience, and had to take many of their points abstractly.  As they've repeatedly noticed, I'm not so attached to the ways they talked through and coped with that experience, which I did not fully share.  My education was 1998, but my experience was twenty years later.  I'm more flexible.

Revisiting open source writing that I revered from the "revolutionary" years today, I'm struck by just how awkwardly boosters twisted and turned around money, even for characteristically awkward nerds.  "Open Source" courted industry, but also [performatively bad-mouthed it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=69ZyX5sN2NA).  "Free Software" was emphatically _not against business_, but obviously was, and often gratingly so.  Money in online software dev would ruin it for everyone, but every new [open-source hire](https://www.drdobbs.com/a-conversation-with-larry-wall/184410483) was a shared dream come true.  The latest <abbr title="initial public offering">IPO</abbr> pop always [made top news](https://www.thestreet.com/investing/va-linux-smashes-ipo-record-soaring-almost-700-836955), but open source transcended capitalism, threatened money-labor markets as obsolete.

["Wikinomics"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikinomics) for the C-suite.  ["Commons-based peer production"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wealth_of_Networks) for the faculty lounge.  ["Bazaar"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Cathedral_and_the_Bazaar) for squinting hackers.  An economy without prices, production without profit, a [White Elephant sale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_elephant) of bytes where money never changed hands.  Exceptionalism for everyone.  [Because the Internet.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Declaration_of_the_Independence_of_Cyberspace)

Looking back, out of the moment, it's easy to see rationalizations and self-promotions for what they were.  Gaps, contradictions---we expect nothing else, and we should expect nothing else from ourselves, right now.  Open source mythmaking wasn't reality somehow pushing its way through straight into our collective nerd consciousness.  It wasn't some newly revealed, transcendant truth.  It was just a timely reflection of the fundamentals, ever indifferent to our understanding.  Big things were happening to coders and the industry.  Big things were happening fast.  We needed to feel we somehow had our heads around it.  Better still if we could convince ourselves we saw the future coming, too.

"Open Source" never really grappled with money.  It solved problems, but never admitted money was a variably in a serious way.  It didn't have to.  Enough people made bank---sometimes despite themselves, othertimes trying to seem like it---and those exceptional stories were easy to amplify.  Especially through the dot-com bubble hype machine, revving way past redline at the time.  For all involved---winners, losers, hopefuls---ignoring money in questions about how we'd make software on the Internet made solving all the equations simpler.  The result was clean, and therefore felt correct.  Feelings, as usual, prevailed.  Especially among those adamantly insisting on how rational they are.

The reality was "personal computing", initial consumer Internet penetration, and a relatively shallow pool of available talent.  Suddenly, savvy nerds in relatively affluent circumstances, plus the kids of relatively affluent parents, got marginally free, fast, public distribution for software.  They used it to build free, fast, public software collaboration.  Public capital markets were eating anything called "softare" right up, even when it taste like dogfood.

Starting from scratch, it was easier _not_ to charge, _not_ to throttle access, _not_ to set permissions or enforce them.  We live with this inheritance to this day.  The Web is decades old, and authentication is still weird and awful inside.  [Xanadu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_Xanadu)---complete with access controls and even content royalty payments---remains trivia.  The Web's standards inheritance reflects what was viable enough to spread in the early days, not any forward-thinking concept of a complete product.  We inherit much the same in our understandings of those systems.

When open source was born, the headline story was "we have the Internet".  "We" was a rather select and self-selecting group of people.  That isn't the story anymore.  The Internet isn't a novelty.  Cheap copies and worldwide comms aren't a novelty.  The story today is "_everyone_ has the Internet".  More than half of humanity.  Billions.

The force that cannot be stopped in software today is the force of millions of untapped talents that could be serving others with software.  The work of networking a few thousand elect and distributing their outputs to the masses continues, but the explanation and hype that greased those wheels, twenty or thirty years ago, no longer explain, much less govern, what's happening now, or what needs to be done about it.  In the large, the mental framing of open source, or open source versus proprietary, has become a hindrance.

Unlocking mass human software potential today requires restoring the old maxim of honest work for honest pay.  We must recouple money earned and value received.  No group of people is better positioned to achieve this than programmers.  We are the people who automate counting and copying and paying for things at scale.

As one of those grown-up kids whose middle-class parents brought a PC and dial-up into the home early, I am extremely sympathetic to the idea that money ruins everything online.  The 90s and early 2000s felt special, more special than now, and we were still scared to use credit cards on the Internet back then.  Correlation or causation?  Correlation or nostalgia?

As one of those grown-up kids, it's been hard to understand that for the vast majority of people now online, "money will ruin the community" isn't a feel-good callback to halcyon days of yore, but social [Catch-22](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catch-22).  Most people can't break into coding $0 software sans material support.  That door isn't open to them by default, but closed.  To let them in, we have to let money in with them.  We let them in with money.  But letting money in---or is it letting them in?---will, we say, ruin it.  So we say as credentialed members of the "community".

It's a mass online equivalent of the swank business club downtown.  The value of the club is exclusivity.  No exclusivity, not the same club.  And the idea that the current, exclusive kind of club is the best kind to have---that software and other work online is best produced by "peers" who can afford to work for nothing or command substantial patronage---implies that defending the unsullied preserve of the few promises more than the untapped potential of the masses.  There are way fewer open-source gigs at large companies and the foundations they fund than potential open-source programmers.

This view is just one symptom of living the future in the early 2000s and falling into the past circa 2020.  There are others.  It's now easier for most people online to publish photos or even videos than code, for example.  Same for long blog posts.  Anyone who's tried to author a patch on a smartphone knows this.  Most people don't surf with physical keyboards.  Kids approach 100 wpm with three fingers on phones, with and without autocorrect.

Internet technology made communication between anyone and nearly anyone else shocking possible.  Society---nearly all societies---are still dealing with that traumatic turn of events.  [Russian state TV has a show where they debunk social media posts.](https://www.1tv.ru/shows/antifeyk/o-proekte)  [Your mom sees debunkable social media posts outsourced to Ghana and Nigeria.](https://techcrunch.com/2020/03/12/twitter-facebook-disinformation-africa-ghana-nigeria-ira-russia/)

<!-- Broad acceptance of permissive licensing made scale differences irrelevant.  Big companies could give and take from sole hackers.  The same hasn't happened for paid transactions. -->

<!-- TODO: return to old "honest pay for honest work" versus financialization, which introduces money with or (usually) without anything useful being done -->

<!-- TODO: so slipper slope to the extreme, be it proprietary licensing of financialization -->
