Even the guy who _isn't_ on Twitter has seen [that WhiteSource report showing copyleft outpacing permissive](https://resources.whitesourcesoftware.com/blog-whitesource/top-open-source-licenses-trends-and-predictions).  I even caught wind of some commentary, like [this piece from Matt Assay](https://www.techrepublic.com/article/digging-into-the-boom-in-permissive-open-source-licensing/).

I'm not here to argue for copyleft over permissive.  I'm not here to join the permissive gloat squad, either.  I'm here to relate what I see in practice, in the field.  The idea of permissive v. copyleft is fun, but also vaccuous.

The WhiteSource article, and the appetite that put sthe bait in its clickbait, perpetuate the mentality of a bygone era.  The social notion that copyleft is one tribe, permissive another, and new licensing choices represent some kind of wonky perpetual Ragnarök between them, descends to us by memes and muscle memories old enough to drink.  With the benefit of hindsight, permissive v. copyleft makes about as much sense, and promises as much genuinely intersting drama, as pen v. pencil or screw v. nail.  Form follows function.

Exactly as WhiteSource presumably expectred, most of the commentary I've seen has taken the form of permissive-license people congratulating themselves.  Theirs, surely, is the side of history.  Permissive shall rise.  GPL shall fall.  Slowly, even the niggling attribution and change-notice rules of popular permissive licenses will fall away, leaving us with something like [Blue Oak](https://blueoakcouncil.org/license/1.0.0).  Maybe we'll even land the mode on outright copyright abandonment, warranty disclaimers and liability limits be damned.

When Matt amplifies Chris DiBona's point that license restrictions discourage adoption, he makes a good point, well shy of a complete case.  Single-minded focus on adoption to the exclusion of everything else makes things simple.  It's easy to run around accumulating evidence for that ideology selectively, and it makes it clear and easy to prescribe what others ought to do.  But monomania of adoption no more faithfully reflects reality than single-minded quality, ideology, aesthetics, or marketing obsession.  Companies pay for software all the time, available under no open license at all, because it is very good, sold very well, or for other countervailing reasons.  The magic of free, permissive licensing is simply overwhelmed.  My local supermarket doesn't stock ten kinds of bottled Italian salad dressing to give me something to look at as I diligently select the cheapest one.  It's complicated.

Assuming that popular copyleft licenses were adequately maintained---they're not---I believe we would still see a distribution favoring permissive licenses on a per-artifact basis.  But counting packages doesn't reflect reality any better than KLOC reflects coder skill.  To wit, I currently boast 359 public npm packages to my name,  most of them permissively licensed.  I can assure you that my numeric contribution to permissive-license supremacy reflects no underlying superiority in quality, innovation, maintenance, or design.  I wonder how they count the kernel.

I wonder why they count at all.