---
title: Locked-In Customers Anonymous
description: stop buying software from assholes
tags:
- Open Source
- Software Industry
---

One of the points that "sold" open source to business was "freedom from predatory vendor lock-in".  Go with open source, you'll never get another "not renewing, call sales" notice for critical code ever again.  Fast forward twenty or forty years, depending on how you count, and the open source faithful still love bashing software vendors they don't work for.  Especially Oracle.

But I've noticed that more often than not, it's no longer "predatory vendor lock-in".  It's just "vendor lock-in", or, frankly, "vendor" full stop.  With "vendor", the "lock-in" goes without saying.  And with "vendor" comes "predatory", as a matter of course.

Does it, really?

If every form of dependence raises your hackles, if the only way you know to play with others is to own their work or get it for free, if any software vendor relationship seems an abusive relationship behind the closed doors and the NDA, you need to stop buying software from assholes.  And stop working for companies that do.  You're feeding the sharks, and the dolphins deserve better.  The software world is not quite that cruel, and you deserve to know it.

Try a boutique vendor.  Or even a larger private shop.  But do your homework, and be sure their finance model won't condemn them to the jaws of short-termist managers, "power closer" sociopaths, and panic-inducing, eat-the-seed-grain sales targets for rank and file.  Negotiate for source code from the get-go.  Happens all the time.  Lock in renewal rights and price protections.  Basically de rigeur at this point.  Get a broad license that kicks in if they end-of-life you.  Usually unobjectionable.  Price out some consulting hours, and involve their development people as collaborators, on a regular basis, rather than just "come and fix it" support.  Make them part of your team.

DHH may or may not be crazy, but 37 Signals isn't going to shank you.  Rich won't be selling Cognitect to Bain, Blackstone, or the Borg anytime soon.  Mike Perham isn't going to decide great ain't good enough, take a huge check from a16z, and set Sidekiq off like a rocket ship, vaporizing your project on the launch pad.  All those companies are made of the kinds of folks you'd probably love to work with, but can't realistically hire for yourself.  Especially if you work at a large, lumbering enterprise with broken, shellshocked people in procurement and bad blood curdling with the passing of every nonrenewal deadline.

If you reach out even to good, small, earnest companies with one hand on your sixgun and the other on your knife, ready for a shootout or a backstabbing, that's likely what you'll get, whether they were out to get you or not.  If either side goes in hot, conflict escalates.  It always takes two, or a big leap of faith, to wind it back down.  Go in ready to play team ball, where not just code and money, but also ideas cross the company line, and you might just make each other money.  Talk through a contract, instead of passing off to the shove-it-down-their-throats department, and the time to close just might surprise you, too.  So will the oddly positive vibes at project start, when nobody feels they probably just got shafted.

That's not to say that you should run out and find a paid alternative to every free or open thing you're running now.  Of course not.  But if the question is "Do we insist on everything open, or do we do deals with companies that charge for their work?", then the answer is "Why not both?" and "It depends, so we better get good at knowing on what."

100% open source, with the occasional sprinkling of paid consulting or support, 100% of the time, is often glaringly suboptimal.  Absolute "independence" is only as deep as your own self-deception, which you'll find out when you hit a problem or an upgrade, and reality reasserts itself.  So is insisting that if it doesn't have a million dollar company, a patent warranty, and 24/7 support behind it, you can't take it seriously or put it in your stack.  That's also too simple, and just as divorced from evident reality.

In the not too distant past, we enjoyed a much richer vocabulary for these kinds of issues.  Gentlemen and would-be gentlemen of the American revolutionary period, for example, were entreated to maintain their independence by subsisting on rents from land, rather than on involvement in trades, professions, or business.  In times of financial distress, gentlemen might stoop to a learned profession, such as law, to reestablish their means.  A few  new gentlemen, Ben Franklin included, worked their way up through commerce or trades, until they could "cash out" to a higher station.  But the status and privilege of gentility were rationalized, in part, by the "disinterestedness" that personal and financial remove from petty commerce implied.  Free of "interest", landed gentlemen could participate in politics, science, art, and the stewardship of society, all for their own sakes.  They could patronize tradesman and artisans to do work that common, everyday exigencies wouldn't bear, and felt a social obligation to do so.

Even so, in designing a new government and a new constitution, the leading lights and commercial kingpins of the former colonies never aimed to make gentlemen in government office---they assumed only men like themselves, or the men they pretended to be---absolutely independent, like divine-right kings of old.  To the contrary, they sought very consciously to design the dependencies of men and institutions, believing, to a point, that dependencies determined behavior.  Behavior like governance.

This was hardly surprising.  While gentlemen were the least constrained by dependence, they sat at the pinnacle of society structured by dependence, and of an explicit, formalized, pre-egalitarian kind rarely seen today, from God to monarch right down to apprentice, servant, and slave.  Steps of remove from the affairs of subsistence and competition insulated gentlemanly characters from interests, passions, and impediments to enlightenment, rendering them neutral and "disinterested".  "Disinterested" not in the sense of indifferent, but as in "without vested interest" or "unconflicted".  A good society was a society of rational, functional personal and institutional dependencies, not a society of economic free agents unmoored from each other, free to spite society with their individuality.

The moral of this history for software is simple:  Binary, yes-or-no independence, a liberty apart from others, is a theoretical construct, an ideological fiction, a power fantasy.  We are interdependent, our projects are interdependent, and our companies are interdependent.  That does not mean we aren't free.

Freedom lies in the choice and maintenance of our dependencies.  They partly determine us, but we partly determine them.  Not just in the code or other building blocks we choose, but far more importantly, in our relationships with others who make them.  The right dependence can enrich our work more than any listless autonomy.  But we can't embrace those opportunities without recognizing them.  We're loathe to recognize them when we let assholes shock us into believing that only assholes run companies, that collaboration among companies must be war, while collaboration with the individuals that work there can be life-changing.

Predatory vendor lock-in is a serious problem.  Not every vendor is predatory.  Not every relationship is a lock-in.  Traumatized brothers and sisters, take heart.  We need to raise our expectations, not ingrain our disappointments.