---
title: Programmer Supremacy
description: prying open the trap of "software freedom"
tags:
- Open Source
- Free Software
- Politics
---

Nathan Schneider's [recent post on the ethical software movement](https://hackcur.io/organize-for-change-or-quit-your-job/) reminded me of an old quip about open source from Andrew Ross, quoted in E. Gabriella Coleman's _Coding Freedom_ back in 2006: "voices proclaiming freedom in every direction, but justice in none".

That stung when I first read it, several years ago.  It stings, if anything, more deeply now.  Because it's not just that free and open source people do a lot of _talking_ about freedom, and very little about justice.  It's that even when free and open source people talk about freedom, they don't really mean freedom. They mean power, and specifically their own power.  The power of coders as a self-conscious class, backed by a myth of software itself as a universally positive, civilizing, progressive force, of which they are anointed clergy.

Try, if you can, to pretend you never heard the phrase "software freedom". Or replace it in your mind with some arbitrary placeholder, like "Macaroni". Now pretend you work for a dictionary company, as a lexicographer, and it's time to enter "Macaroni" into the next edition.  You head to your file of citations, for examples of use in the wild.

Where do people use the term? Why do they use it? What do they appear to mean by it, not according to their own definitions, but according to how it's used, in practice? Your job isn't to report what some community says that it means, but what they mean when they say it.

Overwhelmingly, "software freedom" gets used by programmers when the universe tells them "no".  Want to use that framework for a project at work?  If the answer is no, for whatever reason, you might find yourself thinking "software freedom". Bought a new gadget from the store, and can't turn off a feature you don't like?  If the source code isn't available, you might complain of "proprietary crap" online. Can't use that library to run a website without sharing all the code for it?  Another "software freedom" violation, even if giving potential competitors the same privilege was never part of your plan.

Programmers invoke software freedom to say that they ought to be allowed to do what they wanna do, other considerations be damned. The phrase "software freedom" helps them say this without actually saying it directly, because saying it directly, in personal "me" terms rather than general, high-sound "philosophy" terms, would come across as selfish, immature, and entitled.  Thus laid bare, software freedom boils down to a kind of avocational supremacy.  The usual rules about permission, compensation, respect, and so on don't apply, insofar as they'd apply to those making software. Software people are an exception because they make software.  Software people, and their progress, über alles.  Which explains why other kinds of people don't say it so much.

This hasn't been hard to see, unless you're a programmer, and seeing it conflicted with your ego and your interests.  The Bible of hackerdom, [Stephen Levy's _Hackers_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hackers:_Heroes_of_the_Computer_Revolution), which a lot of hacker have read, calls it out directly:

> In a perfect hacker world, anyone pissed off enough to open up a control box near a traffic light and take it apart to make it work better should be perfectly welcome to make the attempt.  Rules that prevent you from taking matters like that into your own hands are too ridiculous to even consider abiding by.  This attitude helped the Model Railroad Club start, on an extremely informal basis, something called the Midnight Requisitioning Committee.  When TMRC needed a set of diodes or some extra relays to build some new feature into The System, a few S&P people would wait until dark and find their way into the places where those things were kept.  None of the hackers, who were as a rule scrupulously honest in other matters, seemed to equate this with "stealing."  A willful blindness.

The hacker "ethic" is characterized by its readiness to look the other way from, or even preempt and dismiss, investigation into the consequences of its own prerogative.  If a license, a business model, a law, or a locked door stands in the way of what the hacker wants, it's ridiculous, illegitimate, inconceivable, void.  No genuine inquiry is made into the motives or circumstances behind the limitation.  When a thought is spared to those whose interest about to be righteously trounced, it's usually to condemn them for some venal sin, thereby justifying their treatment.  Greedy, stupid, backward, evil.

In the most intuitive case, the fact that the maker of a product, service, or program needs to recoup costs or earn fair compensation becomes irrelevant, even despised.  When such realities get acknowledged at all, the answer is often a hypothetical, futuristic, highly non-specific Utopian get-out-of-moral-quandry-free card.  An imminent "post-scarcity" economy.  A miraculous level field on which they, too, can pillage the non-hacker market for their own account.  Universal basic income.  And so on.  Meanwhile, the futurist, the side of the supposedly balanced moral equation, gets just what they want _right now_.

In the end, the surest test of universal principle versus self-justification, of "software freedom" versus "programmer supremacy", is transitivity.  Software freedom fails the transitivity test.  Those insisting on the benefits of "software freedom" for themselves rarely or never insist on those same benefits for others, especially others unlike them.  They may not may not talk about them.  From the other direction, ideologues have tried to establish the universality of their demands by analogy to established universal rights.  Software is speech.  The illiterate will be motivated, educated, or otherwise sorted out by history.  At least until the question is whether software, including APIs, can or ought to be encumbered by intellectual property---a source of many "no" answers---in which case code is all function. No longer Shakespeare, but a Skilsaw.

Stallman and his school spoke of "users" by default and made ready analogy to speech.  But they thought of themselves as users, and set users' wants equal to their own.  After all, everyone should want to be a programmer, and inevitably would be.  From there chauvinistic loop closes easily.  Those foolish enough _not_ to be want to be programmers can't be helped.  The gods help those who help themselves.

Other schools have also paid rhetorical due to the emancipation of society more broadly.  But only in vague hypotheticals, visions of imminent or distant promised futures.  Often these promises strike a borderline millenarian, emancipation-in-the-promised-land tone.  Thus, when free and open source finally come to full moral fruition, hackers will stop drawing the line of freedom at their own front doors, or around the headquarters' of their employers, and Freedom (or Openness) will sweep the land like a mighty wave.  It is only a matter of time.  Never mind that the bounty of today is earned precisely by standing on the thin green line between Utopian communalism on the supply side, among programmers, data subjects, and contributors of free stuff of all kinds, and the harsh, fish-gobble-fish demand side of the market.

This wave of inevitable freedom, incidentally, would be welcome not just outside of programming but also within it. For as we've seen, injustice afflicts not just helpless muggles but also a great many very helpful developers.  Namely: those who refuse to take jobs working for, or selling into, large firms that gobble up freedom for their tools, libraries, and frameworks, in order to make and keep leverage over those they charge and monetize.

On their face, the ethical concerns we're hearing about in software these days are very different.  What does financial abuse among programmers have to do with the malign uses of software, to profile citizens, stoke hatred, or throw refugees into camps?  A common root, it turns out.  When we give ourselves permission to trample the needs of others, and reinforce that moral blindness with compelling stories, we're as liable to commit one as any other.

Put a blindfold on Godzilla, he's as likely to trample a school as a bank.