---
title: Freedom of Ideology
tags:
- Politics
---

The short path to popular political stardom isn't hard to spot in history.  Offer the public a simple, intuitive theory---an ideology---that promises quick solutions to painful, complex problems.  Meanwhile, drum up suspicion, even hatred, of a convenient scapegoat.  You will need a scapegoat when your theory fails, as it assuredly will if you gain enough power to act out on it.  If you run out of scapegoats, you're in real trouble.  And so is everyone subject to your decisions.

Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.  Simple, catchy theories don't turn complex problems into putt-putt.  Scapegoats don't help or hurt in the matter, one way or another.  But believing good stories and hating other tribes are invariably a lot more fun than world-weary pragmatism.  And a lot more popular.  Especially when times are tough and time lines short.

We define "ideology", like "religion", in terms of deep belief in the absence of compelling evidence.  In other words, we take our ideologies and religions into our worldly experience, not out of it.  Once we do believe, of course, all manner of evidence seems to appear miraculously, when only we take time to see it.  It all seems compelling enough, after the fact, but only to those already compelled.

Like religions, the strongest ideologies spread quickly, often self-consciously.  They're mutually exclusive, seek out combat, and revel in conquest.  But strangely enough, we have come to learn from experience that _freedom_ of religion, not compulsion to religion or suppression of religion, affords the most peace.  So long as adequate provisions for peace as such---laws against violence, means to enforce them---remain in place.

Under freedom of religion, millions of citizens are permitted, even tacitly encouraged, to hold, spread, and act out utterly incompatible ideas, rules, and rituals.  But freedom of religion is not the rulebook for any great civic tournament of religions.  There is no prize to be won.  In tandem with the freedom of religion comes the separation of church of state.  Thus, when the state is strong, religions needn't fear direct assault.  Conversely, when the state is weak, religions don't stand to gain much by bloodying each other in pursuit of it.  Believers are free to express their religious beliefs through participating in government.  Government is free to pass and enforce laws on believers and religious institutions.  But the tools of state do not fall in the hands of religion, or the other way around.

While not specifically stated in our constitution, the United States arguably secures freedom of ideology, as well, by implication from free speech, association, correspondence, and so on.  In trying times, we've made some evidence to suggest writing that freedom out more explicitly might be a good idea.  During the world wars, the state suppressed fascism, or those rumored to subscribe to fascism, whether they broke any constitutional laws or not.  Before and after the wars, the state suppressed communism, or those rumored to subscribe to communism, likewise on the sole basis of belief.  Depending on who you ask, similar ideological purges are ongoing now.  Against conservatives.  Against socialists.  Against Democrats or Republicans.  The troubling accusations are those backed by evidence that the state, and not just private parties, perform the suppression.

Trouble is, if we have freedom of ideology, it doesn't come along with separation of party and state.  Quite the opposite.  By my reckoning, diehards of both major political parties, hailing uniformly from respective ideological fringes, were quite sure the recent election would summon an overwhelming "wave" in their color, blue or red.  At a stroke, the whole of government would fall to their side.  They would then enjoy a free hand to play out civic faith, their ideology, sans compromise or  obstruction.  Their opponents---the other party, the other party's dark money overlords, the other party's pet vanguard demographics---would be washed away.  No scapegoats.  Just salvation.

If we have separation of ideology and state, again, it's just implied. If there's an uncontroversial ideology baked into our American pie, a sloppy, saccharine buzzword the whole country's got behind, in peace and war, it has to be "democracy", the D word.  It's a strange word to enjoy such vague, popular acclaim.  What is democracy, in concrete terms?  Procedural wonkery.  A process.

But I fear that implication's gotten weaker in my lifetime.