---
title: Responsible Fintech Policy
description: blockchain neither needs nor deserves its own regulatory system
tags:
- Blockchain
- Cryptocurrency
- Securities
---

I have signed the open [Letter in Support of Responsible Fintech Policy](https://concerned.tech) calling on members of the United States House and Senate to take a skeptical second look at the blockchain lobby's proposals.  Because I strongly agree with it.

Independence is the first privilege of a freelance professional.  Independence writes this blog.  But many of the careful readers out there will have noticed that I haven't posted anything on blockchain since July of 2017.  It's the one big, obvious topic I've denied myself, for all but five whole years, and not for lack of anything to say.

Five years ago, Bitcoin had just broken a thousand dollars.  Ethereum reached just two years old.  The Securities and Exchange Commission's first investigation of a blockchain scheme, "The DAO", buzzed on [the blogs](https://writing.kemitchell.com/2017/07/25/DAO-Report-of-Investigation.html), including this one.  The "initial coin offering" wave was rising.

I advised a stable of promising blockchain clients.  Mine were the adults in the room: older, wiser veterans with life, business, and legal experience, focused on hard technical, policy, and institutional problems.  All were trying to make blockchains do real work.  All were trying to legitimize the tech, legally and practically.  They weren't basking in reflected glow from their pitch decks.  They weren't pretending daring-do or unfathomable tech-magic exempted them from all public policy.  They'd lived through the 2008 financial crisis as self-conscious, responsible adults.

I fired them all.

One by one, in careful e-mails, I ended our attorney-client relationships.  Referred them to other counsel, more eager to be "crypto lawyers".  Tried as I could to preserve personal rapport, founded on deep personal and professional respect.  I did what I could to explain, succinctly and honestly, that it really wasn't them.  It was the whole "space".  I'd had enough.  I was out.  Every blockchain client got an e-mail.  I made no exceptions.

My income prospects tanked.  I was deeply relieved.  And I still am.  I've taken some blockchain-adjacent clients since --- all small, engineer-driven concerns doing actual cryptography on trickle-down dollars.  But nobody hocking chains, coins, tokens, or inputs to them.  I've lost track of all the new business I've turned down.  Gladly.

I worried that public words here could only undue the respectful farewells I made.  I'm grateful that so many client people have remained in touch, remained on good terms, took my choice with understanding, rather than umbrage.

My pretenses against blockchain were then, and remain now basically three: the work, the tech, and the crime.  In no particular order.

As a lawyer, the work increasingly sucked.  Legal "greenfield" is fun, but we weren't alone out there, and even ace clients increasingly sat across from jokers on many meaningful deals.  Countless negotiations were derailed by rampant neophyte "incentives engineering".  Countless proposals, earnestly made at great time expense, were debunked at intro-business-law-course level.  But even setting fools aside, many clients who held out against temptation to issue a "coin" for quick capital nonetheless succumbed to accommodating those who caved.  If the people wanted to mine for turds to sell as treasures, there was money in pickaxes, transportation, and advice.  The company stank, but at least it was an honest living on step removed.

I got it.  Among the startup-founder precariat, temptation was massive.  You're worried about payroll on one hand.  You're sick at the thought of pounding pavement for pro finance on the other.  Suddenly, a new exit sign: offramp to Easy Street.  In the right (wrong) circumstances, we have to expect even the strongest to take it.  I did not and do not judge.  But I did have a choice.  Five years of my prime down the line, I'm glad to have frittered them otherwise.

More tragically, as a coder, it gutted me seeing the attention, the money, and the brains evacuated out of scene after scene.  Their times in the spotlight finally came, but nascent and frail, the heat basically incinerated them on the spot.  Second-wave peer-to-peer.  Privacy-first engineering.  User-friendly cryptography.  The fuel of the machine was tech cred.  The marketeers were burning it like HMMWVs invading a flat, defenseless country, on someone else's dime, first one to the capital wins.

Some good coders---hell, even some unsuspecting grad students---got well deserved paying opportunities, care of promoters with promises to fill.  But even ignoring the many worthy who didn't, a lot of those blessed went the way of [the HURD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Hurd).  Five years is a lot of years in software land.  The sole invariant requirement---speculative fundability---has been fulfilled again and again, sometimes quite without software, sometimes just with PDFs and `TODOs`.

Dominant chain nodes still convect surrounding space solving nothing.  Private-key crypto is still fraught and user-hostile.  The databases remain slow and expensive, in the midst of a commodifying cloud war.  "Decentralization" is most often tactically vague, and when achieved in any meaningful specificity also promptly sacrificed to speed and convenience in the event of any meaningful adoption.  Privacy properties remain largely ill-conceived or simply wishful thinking.  The leaves off these development lines not facing the money have withered off, stunted, or simply been pruned away.  A lot of good devs who know better are grinding away on on some compromise.

Basic research is hard.  Industrialization is hard.  Achieving both under one banner is miraculous.  Achieving resources to call forth this whole process, under one guiding force, on the basis of _promotional_ talent, has again proved unwise.  Even the amalgamated, monetized want of thousands of suggestible speculators cannot simply will and fund a meaningful innovation into being.  We ought to be funding more great devs and great dev managers.  Fewer social media scene creatures.  That's not the system "crypto" now denotes.

Finally, as a citizen, the worst was the mounting, obvious crime and fraud, the money that crime and fraud made, and the speed with which the money turned around on the system the crime and fraud at first evaded.  Perhaps this shouldn't have come as any great surprise.  It was a short mutagenic jump from reinvesting in hype to reinforcing "community" to running a direct and self-conscious lobby operation, initially on the regulators, then over their heads to the pols, meanwhile on weak or striving backwater jurisdictions wherever they be found.

Nobody needs this blog to parade blockchain horribles or define the new slang for all the old heists and scams ported over to the new system.  Suffice to say it was obviously bad enough in 2017 that even a longtime computer programmer, deeply fascinated by Russian hackerdom, who did research for a securities don in law school, who had a career plan derailed by international financial sanctions, could smell enough smoke to start running the other way.  Largely by repeating self-serving nonsense about how criminal use was negligible and securities laws somehow didn't apply---and finding plenty of lawyers willing to flatter that latter on paper, and eventually to work the predictable litigation---the critical, interested mass rushed the regulators.  They got too far down, too quickly:  it's not coming back up, but heading all the way through us now, damage be done all the way.

That's where we're headed, if we cut blockchain an exception to rules that make sense, just for being blockchain, just to see where it goes under the loosest standard it can buy.  This in marked contrast to laws of the past clarifying that old scams with new tech---the mails, the wires---weren't fooling anyone, and could even do more damage.  Half of humanity is now online.  Being online now includes moving money.  Never have so many predators been gifted all necessary infrastructure to sift so many potential prey.

As becomes clear to anyone who thinks about the year-dates of the important legal decisions, the prospect of technology altering the balance of predator-prey power was hardly new upon our forebears.  The banking and money transfer laws were written to deny criminals those facilities, as they were and as they'd evolve.  The securities and fraud laws were given flexibility precisely to prevent the old scams from slipping through in new guises.  Where terms are loose, lawyers see their cue to look to the "policies"---the purposes behind the language, often stated in the statutes or inherited with the rules as judge-made law.  Those fundamental interests remain the same, and they don't include tolerating Main Street collateral damage because boosters have the pluck to irradiate characterization questions with new jargon and irrelevant tech trivia.  Where and how you keep the spreadsheet doesn't much matter to the agencies and their missions, nor should it.

I don't support cracking down on blockchain just for being blockchain.  A scene being riven with datajackers, confidence men, and bucket shop jockeys does not condemn others not so involved---be they true believers or earnest fools---by abstract association.  But neither do I support special privileges for those in denial or indifference to the unwelcome company they keep.  They way things are going is largely bad or laughable, not deserving of special grace.

Nevertheless, our federal representatives are sure to receive signal that the blockchain phenom has gathered resources unto itself and is ready to dance the DC shuffle.  But they should not mistake money spent for money earned.  That is missing half the balance sheet: all the many promises made and still outstanding.  And the fact the feds themselves printed the money, so much it had make up places to go.

Neither should Congress confuse the hype machine's striking capacity to suss out and summon real grievances---banking access, financial consolidation, transfer network improvement, predatory lending, monetary policy---with any capacity to address them.  The proper tools are known, but they aren't found in any "white paper".  They are found on parchment, in the Constitution, vested in Congress.  Due regulation, not aiding and abetting, is its call.  Tie yourselves to these interests with favors, you will stand with them when their debts come due, the hustle music stops, and full account is taken.
